  OpenWireless Security

There are four basic threat scenarios we are trying to protect against:

a) An attacker using the public Internet to reach the router directly,
trying to gain access to the admin UI or execute code on the router.

b) An attacker running a malicious website on the public Internet, trying to
use XSS, CSRF, or similar attacks that use the router admin's logged-in
session to change settings in the admin UI.

c) An eavesdropper near the router, trying to read private communications
or gain access to the private network.

d) An attacker near the router who knows the private network password, trying
to change settings in the admin UI or execute code on the router.

Assumptions: There is a private network and a public network, as encouraged by
the default OpenWireless setup. Anyone with physical access to the router can
run any code they want on it.

Here are the ways we attempt to defend against those scenarios:

  Scenario A:

We reduce our attack surface by not running any services on the box accessible
to the outside world. Our webserver, listens only on the internal IP
172.30.42.1 (see etc/lighttpd.conf). All ports on the upstream interface ge00
are filtered by iptables rules (TODO).

We ensure that external vulnerabilities can be patched quickly by providing an
easy-to-use and secure update mechanism.

  Scenario B:

We require a CSRF token with all POST requests in order to prevent CSRF. The
CSRF token is a hash of the auth token so the two are bound together to prevent
cookie forcing attacks. Validation of CSRF tokens is done in constant time (see
routerapi/auth.py). We generate the auth token using os.urandom(), a secure
random number generator. Both the auth token and the CSRF token are sent to the
browser as cookies, and the secure flag is set if user login is via HTTPS. The
HttpOnly flag is set on the auth cookie so that an attacker with a temporary
XSS cannot steal it.

We attempt to avoid creating XSS by using JS Handlebars templating (similar to
Mustache), which escapes content before interpolating it by default. We avoid
triple staches ({{{}}}). In our code that uses jQuery, we prefer .text() over
.html(). See app/templates and app/js.

As a fallback in case we do have an XSS, we provide a Content-Security-Policy
disallowing inline scripts (default-src 'self'; image-src 'self' data:;). We
also specify X-Frame-Options: SAMEORIGIN to prevent clickjacking. See
etc/lighttpd.conf.

All admin sessions expire after 24 hours, so the attacker has a limited window
in which to exploit the user's browser. See auth.py.

  Scenario C:

We do not allow connections from the public network (SSID "openwireless.org")
to the router. This prevents attacks from reaching the web server or other
services running on the private network. See etc/firewall.user.

By default we set up the private network with WPA2 PSK+CCMP, and provide a
strong suggested passphrase (TODO) using four words from the diceware
dictionary (7776**4 possibilities, or 3.7e15). This should provide good
resistance to brute force cracking of the WPA2 handshake.

  Scenario D:

We aggressively rate limit failed login attempts on the admin UI, to prevent
brute force cracking of the admin password. The most powerful commands cannot
be executed through the admin UI, but require SSH access to the router.

One an admin UI password has been set, the admin can upload an SSH public key
to gain full access. However, once the admin has successfully logged in with
that public key one, no new key can be added through the admin UI. In order to
change the SSH keys that grant access to the router, the admin must login using
the existing SSH keys, or reset the router's memory. Only pubkey SSH access is
enabled - login by password is disabled (TODO - see etc/config/dropbear).

When the admin UI is over HTTPS, it provides forward secrecy, preventing
retrospective decryption of data (like the admin password) if an attacker gains
access to the private key for the web server. See etc/lighttpd.conf.

Weaknesses: Since the attacker is on the local network they can ARP spoof the
admin and conduct a MITM attack. Because the router certificate is self-signed
anyhow, the admin is likely to click through any certificate warnings, so the
MITM attack is likely to be successful.

  Additional notes

The admin UI password is stored using 55 rounds of pbkdf2, implemented by the
pure python pbkdf2 module. This is about 100ms of CPU time on a Netgear
WNDR3800, or 8ms on a Core2 Duo at 1200 MHz.

  Entropy

Embedded devices like routers have notoriously bad entropy collection, since
they don't have input devices like keyboards and mice. In theory the router can
collect entropy from the network, and the Linux kernel supports this, but it may
be disabled in our builds.

We depend on good entropy to:
  1) Generate the SSH host key.
  2) Generate the self-signed SSL certificate.
  3) Generate a suggested passphrase for the private network.
  4) Choose session keys when negotiating SSL to the client and to the Tor
     network for update checks.

Items (1) and (2) happen during first boot, when even network entropy is not
available. We should probably delay these until the last reasonable moment, e.g.
when the user visits the welcome screen. We should also ensure that the OS
actually does gather entropy from networks. In particular, it should be possible
to gather entropy from neighboring WiFi networks without associating to them. We
should also store the state of the kernel random number generator across reboots.

We may want to allow the admin's browser to submit some secure random bytes from
the Web Crypto API during setup. Since these would only get mixed into the
random pool and not supplant it, there should not be a risk of
attacker-controlled input.

  SSL Certificates

We use SSL to the admin UI by default, in order to prevent eavesdropping of
passwords or cookies. However, because gw.home.lan is not a publicly routeable
address, we are obliged to generate and use a self-signed certificate. There are
some disadvantages: By presenting a certificate that triggers a browser warning,
we may be training users to ignore warnings more frequently. Also, since the
certificate is self-signed, an attacker could generate a different self-signed
certificate and use it to MITM the admin. This attack would be detected by
Firefox, which remembers the public key of self-signed certificates once they
have been accepted once. It would probably not be detected by Chrome, which only
remembers public keys for self-signed certificates for the duration of a browser
session. Even under Firefox, the admin would likely click through a self-signed
certificate warning a second time, since they would have been told to expect it.

One alternative: We can pick a public DNS name that we control, e.g.
router.openwireless.org, and get a valid CA-signed certificate for that name. We
would then distribute that certificate and private key as part of the firmware.
This would prevent a certificate warning but would mean that all OpenWireless
routers use the same private key for their SSL certificate, making a silent MITM
possible. This also means that if I am on a hostile network, an attacker can
redirect a background HTTP request to https://router.openwireless.org, MITM that
address, and collect the authentication cookies for my router.

Another alternative: All routers can be assigned a random name under some
domain, e.g. foo-bar.openwireless.org, and can request a valid CA-signed
certificate for that name.

For now we are sticking with the self-signed certificate approach. Since the
router web server only negotiates forward-secret suites, passive eavesdropping
is ruled out. But since the relevant threat model specifies that the attacker is
on the local network already, it should be easy for them to ARP spoof in order
to MITM the administrator.

  Updates

A script runs periodically to fetch update metadata via Tor, including the
expected hash of the data. The metadata is signed by an offline GPG key, and the
router will verify that signature before proceding.

The actual updated firmware is then fetched over the public Internet. Its hash
is verified and then it is installed.
